= Required Software =

The software is written in the [[https://www.python.org/|Python programming
language]], tested with Python 2.7, and makes use of a number of additional
packages or libraries. These prerequisites are presented below in their own
distinct sections.

== Operating Environment ==

The programs provided are meant to be run from a command-line environment,
making use of the basic operating system facilities to communicate with the
operator and to accept operator-specified parameters, such as the location of
files to be processed.

For convenient use of the programs, a Unix-like environment is recommended
(GNU/Linux, Mac OS X, and so on). The software will work on Windows, but
running it using the command prompt is not as convenient as it is on the
Unix-like platforms.

== A Note about Python Packaging ==

Some operating system distributions do not provide the `pip` utility either as
a module or as a standalone program. See the
[[https://packaging.python.org/tutorials/installing-packages/|Installing
Packages]] section of the [[https://packaging.python.org/|Python Packaging
User Guide]] for advice about setting up `pip`:

[[https://packaging.python.org/tutorials/installing-packages/
#ensure-you-can-run-pip-from-the-command-line|Ensure you can run pip from the
command line]]

== Prerequisites ==

The software prerequisites are described below.

=== Python 2.7 ===

Source: [[https://www.python.org/]]

Typically, operating system distributions provide Python 2.7 as standard or as
an installable package. To check if you have Python 2.7 available on your
system, open a command prompt and type the following:

{{{
python2.7
}}}

If the output from the command indicates Python 2.7, you may proceed to
install other prerequisites. (Use the Ctrl-D key combination to exit Python.)

If Python 2.7 does not seem to be installed, consult your operating system
documentation for the details of installing a suitable package.

=== spaCy ===

Source: [[https://spacy.io/]]

Required components:

 * spaCy (the package itself)
 * es (Spanish data model)

Installing the software and data can be done using Python packaging tools:

{{{
python -m pip install -U --user spacy
python -m spacy download es --user
}}}

In the above, the `--user` option indicates that the software will be
installed for a given system user, as opposed to needing additional privileges
to install it for many users.
