= Further Work =

This software is necessarily limited in functionality and scope. This document
aims to describe limitations and potential improvements.

<<TableOfContents(2)>>

== Database Representations ==

The software generates a serialised form of the input data that is easier to
work with, permitting further querying and export operations without having to
parse the input data again or to establish the maximal presence of connections
between fragments. However, the serialised form makes some assumptions for
convenience, and where terms might have a more varied form, the format
employed would need adjusting.

One approach that would alleviate such concerns and be appropriate for a
slightly more ambitious project would involve introducing a formal database
system, perhaps using a relational model. This would also permit more
flexibility with regard to tools and querying. Although some database systems
also provide support for certain information retrieval activities, it may
still be advisible to perform some of these outside the database system and
then import the processed data into a database for subsequent processing.

== Exposing Concepts in Command Invocation ==

The commands used to [[Getting Started|operate the software]] accept plain
input filenames, but it might be useful to employ logic already present in the
software to associate filenames with archive participants and to allow users
to indicate participant identifiers instead of filenames.

== Finding Fragments using Terms ==

Since the `term_fragments.txt` [[Output Data|output file]] maps terms to
fragments, it might be useful to allow this file to be used to find fragments
using terms so that exploration of the data may start from a particular point
of interest. It may be necessary to adjust this file or provide a more usable
version that employs the root forms of terms, since not all of the different
forms are provided in the existing file.

However, a reliable way of generating the root forms would be needed from the
search terms, with such forms being a consequence of part-of-speech tagging
and potentially needing more than just the individual terms of interest as
input. It might then be an alternative to record all occurring forms instead
of a single form in such a file so that search input may be more easily
matched.

== Word Lists ==

The words or terms in word lists must be specific forms and not root (or
normalised) forms of more general words. Such lists could be enhanced to
support root forms and indicate the part-of-speech role of the word, thus
allowing such forms to match terms in the input data.
